doc: move device driver guide to a doxygen page (#12783)
RIOT-OS/RIOT: doc/doxygen/src/driver-guide.md

non-function details when writing device drivers in/for RIOT. The term device
driver in this context includes all 'CPU-external' devices connected to the CPU
typically via peripherals like SPI, I2C, UART, GPIO, and similar. CPU
peripherals itself are in RIOT not considered to be device drivers, but
peripheral or low-level drivers. Typical devices are network devices like
radios, Ethernet adapters, sensors, and actuators.

## General Design Objectives
Device drivers should be as easy to use as possible. This implies an
'intialize->ready' paradigm, meaning, that device drivers should be ready to use
and in operation right after they have been initialized. On top, devices should
work with physical values where ever possible. So e.g. sensors should return
already converted values in some physical unit instead of RAW data, so that
users can work directly with data from different devices directly without having
to care for device specific conversion.

Additionally towards ease of use, all device drivers in RIOT should provide a
similar 'look and feel'. They should behave similar concerning things like their
state after initialization, like their used data representation and so on.

> Secondly, all device drivers should be optimized for minimal RAM/ROM usage, as

Reviewer: Note that "exposing all functionalities" doesn't necessarily correlate with "higher RAM/ROM consumption". 
If the interface on top doesn't access a feature on top, then it won't be linked. There are e.g several features implemented in the `sx127x` driver that never get to the binary but they are still there if someone need them.

In fact, I think it's easier if the presentation layer is well defined and whatever goes on top choose the right components. What do you think?

Author: I agree, but I would add this in a follow-up PR.

In the end, if a PR adds an "uncommon" feature someone is interested in having and maintaining, and it doesn't add overhead for other users, there is to me no reason to just accept that PR.

RIOT targets (very) constrained devices. This implies, that instead of exposing
all thinkable functionality, the drivers should focus exporting and implementing
a device's core functionality, thus covering ~95% of the use cases. Furthermore
great care should be put into ...(?)

> Third, it should always be possible, to handle more than a single device of one

Reviewer: This considers e.g using `at86rf231` and `at86rf233` at the same time?

Author: Sadly yes. But let us not change any content in this PR, and split any discussion on improving the document to their own PRs. In this PR I only want to move it from the wiki to the official doc, without content changes.

Reviewer: ok!

Author: > Sadly yes.

I meant sadly no, sorry for the confusion. I'm hugely in favor of enabling people to use sub-gigahertz and 2.4 GHz transceivers at the same time, no matter if the happen to be handled by the same driver or not.

@fabian18 is currently working on this, which will have the positive side effect of getting rid of a lot of `#ifdef`s.

# Writing a Device Driver in RIOT                               {#driver-guide}
This document describes the requirement, design objectives, and some
non-function details when writing device drivers in/for RIOT. The term device
driver in this context includes all 'CPU-external' devices connected to the CPU
typically via peripherals like SPI, I2C, UART, GPIO, and similar. CPU
peripherals itself are in RIOT not considered to be device drivers, but
peripheral or low-level drivers. Typical devices are network devices like
radios, Ethernet adapters, sensors, and actuators.

[TOC]

> ## General Design Objectives                  {#driver-guide-design-objectives}

Author: Done

a device's core functionality, thus covering ~95% of the use cases. Furthermore
great care should be put into ...(?)

Third, it should always be possible, to handle more than a single device of one
kind. Drivers and their interfaces are thus designed to keep their state
information in a parameterized location instead of driver defined global
variables.

Fourth, RIOT defines high-level interfaces for certain groups of devices (i.e.
netdev for network devices, SAUL for sensors and actuators), which enables users
to work with a wide variety of devices without having to know anything about the
actual device that is mapped.

Fifth, during initialization we make sure that we can communicate with a device.
Other functions should check the dev pointer is not void, and should also handle
error return values from the lower layer peripheral driver implementations,
where there are some.

Sixth, device drivers SHOULD be implemented independent of any CPU/board code.
To achieve this, the driver implementations should be strictly be based on
platform independent interfaces as the peripheral drivers, xtimer, etc.

## General                                              {#driver-guide-general}

> ### Documentation                                           {#driver-guide-doc}

Author: Done

    uint8_t addr;       /**< the device's address on the bus */
} tmpabc_params_t;
```

**NOTE:** In many cases it makes sense, to copy the `xxx_params` data into the
device descriptor during initialization. In some cases, it is however better to
just link the `params` data via pointer and only copy selected data. This way,
configuration data that is only used once can be read directly from ROM, while
often used fields (e.g. used peripherals) are stored directly in the device
descriptor and one saves hereby one de-referencing step when accessing them.

### Default device configuration                         {#driver-guide-config}
Each device driver in RIOT MUST supply a default configuration file, named
`DEVNAME_params.h`. This file should be located in the `RIOT/drivers/...`. The
idea is, that this file can be overridden by an application or a board, by
simply putting a file with the same name in the application's or the board's
include folders, while RIOT's build system takes care of prefferring those files
instead of the default params file.

A default parameter header file for the example temperature sensor above would
look like this (`tmpabc_params.h`):

> ```c

Reviewer 2: Doxygen markdown doesn't now this kind of code-block guards. Use

```markdown
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~ {.c}
/* code here */
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
```

Author: It [actually does](http://doxygen.nl/manual/markdown.html#md_fenced) in the current stable version, but not in the version used in the CI. Thanks for spotting this!

Reviewer 2: I think it actually also does on the CI version, but not with syntax highlighting...

Reviewer 2: (and the `c` is throwing it off...)

Each device MUST supply a data structure, holding the devices state and
configuration, using the naming scheme of `DEVNAME_t` (e.g. `dht_t`, or
`at86rf2xx_t`). In context of RIOT, we call this data structure the device
descriptor.

This device descriptor MUST contain all the state data of a device. By this, we
are not limited on the number of instances of the driver we can run
concurrently. The descriptor is hereby used for identifying the device we want
to interact with, and SHOULD always be the first parameter for all device driver
related functions.

Typical things found in these descriptors are e.g. used peripherals (e.g. SPI or
I2C bus used, interfacing GPIO pins), data buffers (e.g. RX/TX buffers where
needed), or state machine information.

On top of the device descriptor, each device driver MUST also define a data
structure holding the needed configuration data. The naming scheme for this type
is `DEVNAME_params_t`. In contrary to the device descriptor, this data structure
should only contain static information, that is needed for the device
initialization as it is preferably allocated in ROM.

A simple I2C temperature sensors's device descriptor could look like this:

> ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~ {.c}

Reviewer 2: Something still isn't right... I think you need to remove the whitespace

```suggestion
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~{.c}
```

However, while enabling syntax highlighting with this, the latter code blocks are still not rendered properly...

Reviewer 2: For the record, this is how the page currently renders

![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/675644/69536855-20932980-0f7f-11ea-8070-d31fdfcf81b8.png)

Author: On my system it worked fine. I used a markdown linter to verify the syntax now. It complained about missing blank lines before or after then fenced code blocks. Maybe this is what the old version of the Doxygen didn't handle correctly. Let's see, if this now works.

(However: A numbered list containing fenced code blocks will not work, when having blank lines in between. I had to change the source to `First, <first item>. Second, <second item>, ...`.)

Author: Maybe its the `...` that the syntax highlighter in the code blocks cannot handle? I changed those to `/* ... */` to create valid c syntax.

Reviewer 2: > (However: A numbered list containing fenced code blocks will not work, when having blank lines in between. I had to change the source to `First, <first item>. Second, <second item>, ...`.)

Did you try

```markdown
1. Blafoo

   ~~~~~~~~~ {.c}
   /* some code */
   ~~~~~~~~~
```
?

Reviewer 2: *Still* doesn't build with 1.8.13 btw :confused:

Author: > Did you try

Just did, but with that I also get incorrectly rendered markdown locally (with the current Doxygen version).

Author: Using `@code` and `@endcode` instead of the fences works reliable on the old version of Doxygen. But that still doesn't work in conjunction with the numbered list.

Writing a Device Driver in RIOT                                 {#driver-guide}
===============================

This document describes the requirement, design objectives, and some
non-function details when writing device drivers in/for RIOT. The term device
driver in this context includes all 'CPU-external' devices connected to the CPU
typically via peripherals like SPI, I2C, UART, GPIO, and similar. CPU
peripherals itself are in RIOT not considered to be device drivers, but
peripheral or low-level drivers. Typical devices are network devices like
radios, Ethernet adapters, sensors, and actuators.

[TOC]

# General Design Objectives                   {#driver-guide-design-objectives}

Device drivers should be as easy to use as possible. This implies an

> 'intialize->ready' paradigm, meaning, that device drivers should be ready to use

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
'initialize->ready' paradigm, meaning, that device drivers should be ready to use
```

and in operation right after they have been initialized. On top, devices should

> work with physical values where ever possible. So e.g. sensors should return

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
work with physical values wherever possible. So e.g. sensors should return
```

Author: I applied the typo fix ("where ever" --> "wherever"). I agree with the reformulation, but I don't want to introduce more changes in this PR than fixing typos and grammar mistakes, so that the discussion is focused only on whether we want this doc to remain in the wiki, or move it to the official doc.

already converted values in some physical unit instead of RAW data, so that
users can work directly with data from different devices directly without having

> to care for device specific conversion.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
to care about device specific conversion.
```

> 

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion

However, please avid the use of `float` or `double`. Instead, multiply to the next SI unit. E.g. if an ADC would return values like "1.23 V", chose to return "1230 mV" instead.
```

Reviewer 4: Oh sorry this was just about moving the file without changing it's contents, right?
If so, please ignore (We should still add this imho)

Author: +1 for both adding it, and for adding it as separate PR ;-)

Additionally towards ease of use, all device drivers in RIOT should provide a
similar 'look and feel'. They should behave similar concerning things like their
state after initialization, like their used data representation and so on.

> Secondly, all device drivers should be optimized for minimal RAM/ROM usage, as

Reviewer 3: I'm looking for "First" somewhere but can't find it. I think it should be at the beginning of one of the above paragraphs.

Author: It should. Again, I would like to keep this change out of this PR to keep this PR focus only on the move to the RIOT Repo

RIOT targets (very) constrained devices. This implies, that instead of exposing

> all thinkable functionality, the drivers should focus exporting and implementing

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
all thinkable functionality, the drivers should focus on exporting and implementing
```

a device's core functionality, thus covering ~95% of the use cases. Furthermore

> great care should be put into ...(?)

Reviewer 3: into what ?

Author: That's a good question :laughing:. (I want to split content changes off to separate PRs, so that they can be discussed individually. I will add the spelling and grammar fixes, as doubt that anyone is opposed to them.)

Third, it should always be possible, to handle more than a single device of one
kind. Drivers and their interfaces are thus designed to keep their state
information in a parameterized location instead of driver defined global
variables.

Fourth, RIOT defines high-level interfaces for certain groups of devices (i.e.

> netdev for network devices, SAUL for sensors and actuators), which enables users

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
netdev for network devices, SAUL for sensors and actuators), which enable users
```

to work with a wide variety of devices without having to know anything about the
actual device that is mapped.

Fifth, during initialization we make sure that we can communicate with a device.
Other functions should check the dev pointer is not void, and should also handle
error return values from the lower layer peripheral driver implementations,
where there are some.

> Sixth, device drivers SHOULD be implemented independent of any CPU/board code.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Sixth, device drivers should be implemented independent of any CPU/board code.
```

Author: I think this SHOULD is intended to be interpreted as in [RFC 2119](https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc2119)

> To achieve this, the driver implementations should be strictly be based on

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
To achieve this, the driver implementations should strictly be based on
```

platform independent interfaces as the peripheral drivers, xtimer, etc.

# General                                               {#driver-guide-general}

## Documentation                                            {#driver-guide-doc}

> Document what your driver does! Most device come with a very large number of

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Document what your driver does! Most devices come with a very large number of
```

features, while the corresponding device driver only supports a sub-set of them.
This should be clearly stated in the device driver's documentation, so that
anyone wanting to use the driver can find out the supported features without
having to scan through the code.

## Device descriptor and parameter configuration          {#driver-guide-types}

Each device MUST supply a data structure, holding the devices state and
configuration, using the naming scheme of `DEVNAME_t` (e.g. `dht_t`, or

> `at86rf2xx_t`). In context of RIOT, we call this data structure the device

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
`at86rf2xx_t`). In the context of RIOT, we call this data structure the device
```

descriptor.

> This device descriptor MUST contain all the state data of a device. By this, we

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This device descriptor MUST contain all the state data of a device. This way, we
```

Author: I also agree as this sounds better. But again I think this might be better to do in a follow up.

are not limited on the number of instances of the driver we can run
concurrently. The descriptor is hereby used for identifying the device we want
to interact with, and SHOULD always be the first parameter for all device driver
related functions.

> Typical things found in these descriptors are e.g. used peripherals (e.g. SPI or

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Typical things found in these descriptors are for example used peripherals (e.g. SPI or
```

Author: :+1: for this, this greatly improves the reading flow. But as it is not a typo or grammar mistake, I would like to keep this out for now.

/**
 * @brief   Allocation of TMPABC configuration
 */
static const tmpabc_params_t tmpabc_params[] = {
    TMPABC_PARAMS
}
/* ... */
@endcode

Now to influence the default configuration parameters, we have these options:

First, we can override one or more of the parameter from the makesystem, e.g.

@code{.sh}
CFLAGS="-DTMPABC_PARAM_ADDR=0x23" make all
@endcode

Second, we can override selected parameters from the board configuration
(`board.h`):

@code.{c}
/* ... */
/**
 * @brief   TMPABC sensor configuration
 * @{
 */
#define TMPABC_PARAM_I2C        (I2C_DEV(1))
#define TMPABC_PARAM_ADDR       (0x17)
/** @} */
/* ... */
@endcode

Third, we can define more than a single device in the board configuration
(`board.h`):

@code{.c}
/* ... */
/**
 * @brief   Configure the on-board temperature sensors
 * @{
 */
#define TMPABC_PARAMS           { \
                                  .i2c  = I2C_DEV(1), \
                                  .addr = 0x31 \
                                }, \
                                { \
                                    .i2c  = I2C_DEV(1), \
                                    .addr = 0x21 \
                                }
/** @} */
/* ... */

> @encode

Reviewer 2: > Using `@code` and `@endcode` instead of the fences works reliable on the old version of Doxygen. But that still doesn't work in conjunction with the numbered list.

But it has some other pitfalls ;-)

```suggestion
@endcode
```

Author: Done. Thanks!

And finally, we can simply override the `tmpabc_params.h` file as described
above.

## Initialization                                {#driver-guide-initialization}

In general, the initialization functions should to the following:

- initialize the device descriptor
- initialize non-shared peripherals they use, e.g. GPIO pins
- test for device connectivity, e.g. does a SPI/I2C slave react
- reset the device to a well defined state, e.g. use external reset lines or do
  a software rest
- do the actual device initialization

For testing a device's connectivity, it is recommended to read certain

> configuration data with a defined value from the device. Some devices off

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
configuration data with a defined value from the device. Some devices offer
```

`WHO_AM_I` or `DEVICE_ID` registers for this purpose. Writing and reading back
some data to the device is another valid option for testing it's responsiveness.

For more detailed information on how the signature of the init functions should
look like, please refer below to the specific requirements for network devices
and sensors.

## Return values                                  {#driver-guide-return-values}

As stated above, we check communication of a device during initialization, and
handle error return values from the lower layers, where they exist. To prevent

> subsequent miss-use by passing NULL pointers and similar to the subsequent

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
subsequent misuse by passing NULL pointers and similar to the subsequent
```

should be named, meaning that the driver MUST define an enum assigning names to
the actual used value, e.g.

@code{.c}
enum {
    TMPABC_OK    = 0,       /**< all went as expected */
    TMPABC_NOI2C = -1,      /**< error using the I2C bus */
    TMPABC_NODEV = -2       /**< no device with the configured address found on the bus */
};
@endcode

## General Device Driver Checklist            {#driver-guide-general-checklist}

- *MUST*: the supported feature set and any custom behavior is clearly
  documented
- *MUST*: device descriptor is defined: `devab_t`
- *MUST*: device parameter `struct` is defined: `devab_params_t`
- *MUST*: a default parameter configuration file is present, e.g.
  `RIOT/drivers/devab/include/devab_params.h`
- *MUST*: all error and status return codes are named, e.g.
  `DEVAB_OK, DEVAB_NOSPI, DEVAB_OVERFLOW, ...`
- *MUST*: use `const devab_t *dev` when the device descriptor can be access
  read-only

# Sensors                                               {#driver-guide-sensors}

## SAUL                                                    {#driver-guide-saul}

All sensor drivers SHOULD implement the SAUL interface. It is however

> recommended, that the drivers are written in a way, that the drivers to not

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
recommended, that the drivers are written in a way, that the drivers do not
```

solely export the SAUL interface, but map the SAUL interface upon a driver
specific one.

For example, a temperature driver provides the following function (`tmpabc.c`):

@code{.c}
int16_t tmpabc_read(tmpabc_t *dev);
@endcode

which then can easily be mapped to SAUL (`tmpabc_saul.c`):

@code{.c}
int saul_read(saul_t *dev, phydat_t *data)
{
    memset(data, 0, sizeof(phydat_t));
    data->x = tmpabc_read((tmpabc_t *)dev);
    data->unit = UNIT_TEMP_C;
    data->scale = -2;
    return 1;
}
@endcode

> This ensure the versatility of the device driver, having in mind that one might

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This ensures the versatility of the device driver, having in mind that one might
```

want to use the driver without SAUL or maybe in a context without RIOT.

## Initialization                         {#driver-guide-sensor-initialization}

Sensor device drivers are expected to implement a single initialization
function, `DEVNAME_init`, taking the device descriptor and the device's
parameter struct as argument:

@code{.c}
int tmpabc_init(tmpabc_t *dev, const tmpabc_params_t *params);
@endcode

After this function is called, the device MUST be running and usable.

## Value handling                         {#driver-guide-sensor-value-handling}

### Value semantics                      {#driver-guide-sensor-value-semantics}

All sensors in RIOT MUST return their reading results as real physical values.
When working with sensor data, these are the values of interest, and the
overhead of the conversion is normally neglectable.

### Typing                                         {#driver-guide-sensor-types}

All values SHOULD be returned using integer types, with `int16_t` being the
preferred type where applicable.

> In many situations, the physical values can not be mapped directly to integer

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
In many situations, the physical values cannot be mapped directly to integer
```
Can this be considered as a typo ? ;)

values. For example, we do not want to map temperature values to integers

> directly while using their fraction. The recommended way to solve this by

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
directly while using their fraction. The recommended way to solve this is by
```

scaling the result value using decimal fixed point arithmetic, in other words
just return centi-degree instead of degree (e.g. 2372c°C instead of 23.72°C).

## Additional Sensor Driver Checklist          {#driver-guide-sensor-checklist}

- *MUST*: mandatory device parameters are configurable through this file, e.g.
  sampling rate, resolution, sensitivity
- *MUST*: an init function in the style of
  `int devab_init(devab_t *dev, const devab_params_t *params);` exists
- *MUST*: after initialization, the device must be operational
- *MUST*: all error and return values are named, e.g.
  `DEVAB_OK, DEVAB_NODEV, ...`
- *MUST*: all 'read' functions return values in their physical representation,
  e.g. `centi-degree, Pa, lux, mili-G`
- *MUST*: all 'read' functions return integer values, preferably `int16_t`
- *SHOULD*: if multiple dimensions are read, they SHOULD be combined into a
  data structure
- *SHOULD*: the driver implements the SAUL interface

> - *SHOULD*: the driver exports functions for putting it to sleep and waking

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- *SHOULD*: the driver exports functions for putting it to sleep and waking up
```

  the device

# Network devices                                        {#driver-guide-netdev}

## Initialization                                   {#driver-guide-netdev-init}

The initialization process MUST be split into 2 steps: first initialize the
device descriptor and if applicable the used peripherals, and secondly do the
actual device initialization. The reason for this is, that before a device is
actually activated and can start to process data, the network stack for the

> device needs to initialized. By supplying a second init function, that does the

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
device needs to be initialized. By supplying a second init function, that does the
```

actual initialization, we can hand the control over when this is done to the
actual network stacks.

The initialization functions SHOULD follow this naming scheme:

@code{.c}
void netabc_setup(netabc_t *dev, const netabc_params_t *params);
int netabs_init(netabc_t *dev);
@endcode

## netdev                                      {#driver-guide-netdev-interface}

Device driver for network device SHOULD implement the `netdev` interface. It is
up to the implementer, if the device driver also offers a device specific
interface which is then mapped to the `netdev` interface, or if the device

> driver can purely interfaced using `netdev`. While the second option is

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
driver can be purely interfaced using `netdev`. While the second option is
```
